N4. PEDESTRIANIZATION OF THE HISTORICAL CENTRE OF

QUITO. A WAY TO THE CONSERVATION OF THE CULTURAL

HERITAGE.

Authors:

Elizabeth Regalado Bolaños - Universidad Central de Ecuador

Iván Medina Carranco - Universidad Central de Ecuador

Zoila Ruiz Chávez - Universidad Central de Ecuador

Collaborators:

David Solís Martín (lead) - Universidad de Sevilla

Francisco Manuel Sanchez Castillo

Juan Luis Sánchez Fuentes

Andrés José Prieto Ibáñez

Jose Miguel Hernandez Segura

Juan Francisco Ojeda Jiménez

Alejandro Romero Reche

Mónica Rueda García

Brief: Ecuador is currently promoting tourism as an important income source, giving

a greater role to the city of Quito, which was the first city in the world to be given the

status of World Heritage by UNESCO. Quito is one of the most touristic cities in

Ecuador, a tradition that draws mainly from its historic quarter, containing around 130

monumental buildings with a great variety of art styles in sculptures and paintings of

religious nature in its majority. It also contains more than 5000 buildings registered

under the heritage inventory of the National Institute of Cultural Heritage (INPC).

The digital documentation system of the INPC (ABACO) holds the conservation state

of all the (material) cultural entities of the cultural heritage of Ecuador, which shows

the level of conservation risk currently affecting monuments, buildings, public squares

etc. due to the high vehicular traffic in Quito's historic quarter. For this reason, there

is an initiative to pedestrianize the aforementioned quarter as a means to protect and

conserve the heritage in this area.

For the authorities of the city of Quito, this initiative has become an unfulfilled target.

The proposal has been considered several times but however, it has not been possible

to implement so far. Being this pedestrianization a fundamental strategy for the

conservation of the cultural heritage, the present study attempts cast light on the

evaluation of the different proposals for such intervention. This is, an attempt to

develop a tool that will allow to test different scenarios, visualizing, identifying and

fixing problemswithout having to implement them for real. The model will become an

aiding tool for managers, experts and authorities in the process of decision making.

The aim is to model the pedestrianization of the historic quarter of Quito, taking into

account the current physical distribution of all the monuments that make up the

cultural heritage of this area. For this purpose, there is data available regarding

streets, buildings and squares in GIS format (from the SNI), and all the monument

conservation data from ABACO, plus all the data regarding public transport from the

municipality of Quito.

Key question: What is the best way to carry out a pedestrianization of the historic

quarter of the city of Quito?
