N6. ELECTORATE BEHAVIOR DURING 2004 SPAIN ELECTIONS

Author:

José Luis Sáez Lozano - Universidad de Granada

josaez@ugr.es

Collaborators:

Jesús Horno Cobo (lead)

Alejandro Labrador Ledesma

Ángel Luis Hans Siria

Jessica González Saenz

Antonio Paredes Moreno

Jorge Calvo Martín

Xavier Seguí Salom

Brief: General elections of march the 14th of 2004 (14-M) will be remembered as the

elections preceded by the march the 11th attack (11-M). The pre-election surveys

before 11-M gave triumph to PP (Partido Popular). After the attack, as time went by,

the behaviour of a big amount of voters changed in such a way that the ultimate

winner was PSOE (Partido Socialista Obrero Español).

The electoral law in Spain does not allow to publish electoral surveys results within the

six previous days before de voting. For that reason, we don't have any study that allow

us to identify the psicological factors that lead to that change. We don't have a group

of fixed people who were asked before and after the polls either. Definitely, we don't

have any cualitative studies that give us information about the reasons for the change

of mind in the individual vote.

From my little knowledge of the multiagent modeling, I think that the reasons that made

the change in vote orientation could be modeled from factors related to individual

behaviour. We have the pre-election survey from the CIS (Centro de Investigaciones

Sociológicas), that give us information about the variables that explain the electoral

behaviour. From that data, we can simulate how the attack affects the voters. We may

select those electors who said that will vote PP and try to make a model to know why a

big amount of them decided to refuse or change their votes.

Which factors affect the PP electors to made them change their mind?

The decision of an elector is based on many factors depending of the theory we use

to describe the model.

Key question: Which factors affected PP electors, and why did they change their

mind after the 11-M attacks?
