N7. COUPLING BETWEEN MESSENGER RNA SYNTHESIS AND

DEGRADATION DURING GENOME EXPRESSION

Authors:

Sebastián Chávez de Diego - Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla

schavez@us.es

David Pérez Aguado - Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla

María José Chávez de Diego - Universidad de Sevilla

Francisco Romero Campero - Universidad de Sevilla

Collaborators:

Daniel Corzo García

Concepción García Vidal

Pablo Canseco Ortiz

Juan Carlos Cuerda López

Daniel Jurado Sánchez

Javier Boza Farrán

Brief: Genome expression involves the synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA), a short-
lived molecule whose translation directs the synthesis of cellular proteins and that is

subject to degradation after the translation process. Up to the date, mRNA synthesis

and degradation has been considered as a linear phenomenon in which the above

steps occur subsequently without a regulatory interconnection. However, gene

expression can be studied as a global system in which all their stages are coupled

and interconnected by regulatory mechanisms. We have contributed to demonstrate

that the machineries of mRNA synthesis and degradation physically and functionally

interact in the cell nucleus. We have proposed that it allows the cross-regulation of

transcription with mRNA degradation and vice versa, giving rise to a circular system,

which would explain the large robustness observed in gene expression (Haimovich et

al, 2013).

Transcription is performed by RNA polymerase in cooperation with a set of auxiliary

factors, and is divided into three phases: initiation, elongation and termination. During

elongation RNA polymerase often undergoes a curious phenomenon of arrest where it

translocates backwards with respect to both the DNA template and the RNA transcript,

without shortening this one (Gómez-Herreros et al, 2012). This backtracking

phenomenon can be reverted through the auxiliary factor TFIIS, allowing the

resumption of mRNA synthesis. Experimental evidence obtained in our laboratory

suggests that the backtracking process could imprint the synthesized mRNA,

conditioning its half-life. Moreover, backtracked polymerases would be the regulatory

targets of the mRNA degradation machinery when acting on the transcriptional

process.

By using the NetLogo software, we have constructed a computational multiagent-
based model of this system, using the main elements of the machinery of synthesis

and degradation, as well as some of the auxiliary factors.

The minimal transcription/degradation system that we have modelled is composed of

the following elements:

RNA polymerase II; there are other RNA polymerases in eukaryotic cells but we

focus in this because it transcribes protein-encoding genes. When RNA polymerase

II is elongating mRNA can be either active or inactive (backtracked).

TFIIS. This is the factor that promotes the reactivation of backtracked RNA

polymerase II

Ccr4 and Xrn1; these are the two main components of the mRNA degradation

machinery. Xrn1 is a 5’-3’ RNA exonuclease. Ccr4 is the main mRNA 3’ deadenylase.

In addition, Ccr4 is a transcription elongation factor that opposes RNA polymerase II

backtracking.

The continuous variables of the system are the following:

Total amount of RNA polymerases engaged in transcription

Proportion of transcribing RNA plymerases that are active (non backtracked)

Proportion of transcribing RNA plymerases that are active (non backtracked)

mRNA molecules present in the cell

Half-life of the mRNA

These continuous variables can be experimentally measured in a rather accurate

manner. We have chosen GAL1, one of the best characterized genes of the yeast

Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is our favourite model organism.

The discrete variables of the system are the following:

Presence of the mRNA degradation factors (Yes/No)

Presence of the RNA polymerase II reactivation factors (Yes/No)

Capability of the RNA polymerase II to become backtracked (Yes/No)

Xrn1, Ccr4 and TFIIS are non-essential proteins in yeast. The mutant strains lacking

these factors are viable in standard growth conditions. When compared with the wild

type, mRNA concentrations are surprisingly similar in these strains. The modelling of

the system should allow explaining the robustness of the mRNA synthesis/degradation

system.

This work is part of the project entitled "Crosstalk between transcription and mRNA degradation: influence of

chromatin and RNA polymerase II backtracking", financed by The Spanish Ministry of Economy and

Competitiveness (MINECO) (grant BFU2013-48643-C3-1-P). Although carried out in a yeast experimental

system, the high degree of evolutionary conservation of gene expression mechanisms makes this work of

general interest for Biology and Biomedicine.

Key question: Is there a cross-regulation between mRNA synthesis and degradation

during genome expression?
